------------Core Java------------

1. Can we override main method in Java?
We can overload main method, but we cannot override main method. Static methods cannot be overridden
❌ main cannot be overridden because it is static.
✅ main can be overloaded with different parameter lists.

2. Use of Immutable? (or) How to create Immutable class (or) Why String is immutable in Java
Immutable objects are objects whose state cannot be changed after they are created.

They are widely used in Java for several reasons:
✅ Thread Safety – Since immutable objects cannot change, multiple threads can access them without synchronization issues.
✅ Security – Immutable objects prevent unintended modifications, making them ideal for sensitive data.
✅ Caching & Performance – Since their state doesn’t change, they can be safely cached and reused.
✅ HashMap/HashSet Keys – Since hash values do not change, immutable objects work well as keys in collections like HashMap.

To make a class immutable, follow these rules:

Declare the class as final so it cannot be extended.
Make all fields private and final so they cannot be modified after initialization.
Do not provide setters to prevent modifying the fields.
Initialize fields via a constructor and do not expose references to mutable objects.
Return deep copies of mutable objects in getters instead of returning original references.

Why String is immutable in Java 
For example, database username, password are passed as String to get database connection and in socket programming host and port details passed as String.
Since String is immutable, its value can't be changed otherwise any hacker could change the referenced value to cause security issues in the application

StringBuffer vs StringBuilder
1)	StringBuffer is synchronized i.e. thread safe. It means two threads can't call the methods of StringBuffer simultaneously.	StringBuilder is non-synchronized i.e. not thread safe. It means two threads can call the methods of StringBuilder simultaneously.
2)	StringBuffer is less efficient than StringBuilder.	StringBuilder is more efficient than StringBuffer.
3)	StringBuffer was introduced in Java 1.0	StringBuilder was introduced in Java 1.5

3) Contract between HashCode and Equals / Purpose of Hashcode and equals
1. Contract Between hashCode() and equals()
If two objects are equal (equals() returns true), they must have the same hashCode().
This ensures correct behavior in hash-based collections.
If two objects have the same hashCode(), they may or may not be equal.
Different objects can have the same hash code (hash collision).
If two objects are not equal, their hash codes should ideally be different.
This improves performance in hash-based collections.
2. Purpose of hashCode() and equals()
✅ hashCode() Purpose
Generates a unique integer representation for an object.
Used in hash-based collections (HashMap, HashSet) for fast lookups.
Reduces the number of equals() comparisons by first checking hash codes.
✅ equals() Purpose
Defines logical equality between two objects.
Determines whether two objects should be treated as the same.
Used in collections (Set, List) and searching operations.


4. Can we add object as key in HashMap?
	Ans: Yes. But we have to override Hashcode and equals
5. Collision handled in HashMap
6. Custom Exception
public class WrongFileNameException extends Exception {  
    public WrongFileNameException(String errorMessage) {  
    super(errorMessage);  
    }  
}

7. Inner Class
Type	                        Description
Member Inner Class	           A class created within class and outside method.
Anonymous Inner Class	       A class created for implementing an interface or extending class. The java compiler decides its name.
Local Inner Class	           A class was created within the method.
Static Nested Class        	   A static class was created within the class.
Nested Interface	           An interface created within class or interface.

8. Singleton class?
✅ Ensures a single instance – Prevents multiple objects of the same class.
✅ Saves memory – Reduces object creation overhead.
✅ Global access point – The same instance is accessible everywhere.
✅ Useful in logging, database connections, caching, and configurations.

class Singleton {
    private static Singleton instance;

    private Singleton() {} // Private constructor

    public static Singleton getInstance() {
        if (instance == null) {
            instance = new Singleton();
        }
        return instance;
    }
}


9. How to make only one thread to enter method?
Can make synchronized keyword in method signature or use synchronized block inside method if you dont want whole method to be impacted

synchronized{
             //initialization
            }


10. Thread life cycle
1️⃣ New → 2️⃣ Runnable → 3️⃣ Blocked/Waiting/Timed Waiting → 4️⃣ Running → 5️⃣ Terminated

1️⃣ New (Created)
A thread is in the new state when it is created but not started yet.
It stays in this state until .start() is called.
eg --> Thread t1 = new Thread(() -> System.out.println("Thread running"));

2️⃣ Runnable (Ready to Run)
After calling .start(), the thread moves to the runnable state.
The thread is waiting for CPU time from the scheduler.
Thread t1 = new Thread(() -> System.out.println("Thread running"));
t1.start();  // Moves to Runnable state

3️⃣ Running (Executing)
The thread is picked by the CPU and is currently executing its task.
It remains in this state until:
It completes execution (moves to terminated).
It needs to wait for some resource (moves to waiting).
Another thread gets CPU time (moves to runnable).

🔹 Blocked State
The thread is trying to access a synchronized resource that is locked by another thread.
It waits until the lock is released.
✔ Happens when another thread holds a synchronized lock.
🔹 Waiting State
The thread is waiting indefinitely until another thread notifies it.
It moves back to runnable when notified.
✔ Key Method: .wait()
🔹 Timed Waiting State
The thread waits for a fixed amount of time, then automatically resumes.
eg --> Thread.sleep(3000);
✔ Key Methods:
✅ .sleep(time) → Waits for a given time.
✅ .join(time) → Waits for another thread to complete or timeout.

5️⃣ Terminated (Dead)
The thread finishes execution or is stopped manually.
A terminated thread cannot be restarted.
✅ Thread ends when run() method finishes execution


11. OOPS concepts (Inheritance, Polymorphism, Abstraction[Interface,Abstract class] & Encapsulation)
Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) is based on four key principles:

1️⃣ Encapsulation (Data Hiding)
✔  Access Modifiers(private/protected/public/default)

2️⃣ Abstraction (Hiding Implementation)
✔ Abstract Classes (Partial abstraction)
✔ Interfaces (Full abstraction)

3️⃣ Inheritance (Code Reusability)
🔹 Types of Inheritance in Java
✔  Single Inheritance → One class inherits another.
✔  Multilevel Inheritance → Class B inherits A, and Class C inherits B.
✔  Hierarchical Inheritance → One parent has multiple child classes.
❌ Multiple Inheritance → Not supported in Java with classes (but possible with interfaces).

4️⃣ Polymorphism (Method Overloading & Overriding)
✔ Method Overloading(Compile-time Polymorphism)
Same method name, different parameters in the same class.
Decided at compile time.

✔ Method Overriding(Runtime Polymorphism)
Same method name, same parameters, but different implementation in a subclass.
Decided at runtime.
Achieved using inheritance.


12. Checked vs Unchecked Exception
1️⃣ Checked Exceptions
Definition
These exceptions are checked at compile time, meaning the compiler ensures that the exception is either caught with a try-catch block or declared to be thrown using throws.
Checked exceptions are exceptions that must be handled or declared in the method signature using throws or by try/catch
Examples --> IOException, SQLException, ClassNotFoundException

2️⃣ Unchecked Exceptions
Definition
Unchecked exceptions are exceptions that are not checked at compile time, and are usually caused by programming errors.
They are subclasses of RuntimeException.
These exceptions do not require explicit handling; the compiler does not enforce checking.


12. throw vs throws
1️⃣ throw
Definition
throw is used to explicitly throw an exception in a method or block of code.
It is followed by an instance of an exception class (either a checked or unchecked exception).
eg ->   if (age < 18) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("Age must be 18 or above.");
        }

2️⃣ throws
Definition
throws is used to declare that a method may throw one or more exceptions during its execution.
This tells the compiler that a method might throw an exception, and the calling method needs to either handle or declare it.
throws is used in the method signature to declare exceptions that the method might throw.


13. How hashmap internally works
✔ Buckets: HashMap maintains an array of "buckets" (or "slots") where key-value pairs are stored.
✔ Hash Function: The hash function computes the hash code of the key and uses it to determine which bucket to store the entry in.
✔ Collision Handling: When two keys hash to the same bucket, a collision occurs. HashMap handles collisions using either chaining or open addressing.
🔹 Chaining (Linked List or Tree)
Before Java 8: HashMap used a linked list to store multiple entries in the same bucket.
After Java 8: HashMap improves this by converting the linked list to a balanced tree (e.g., Red-Black Tree) when the number of entries in a bucket exceeds a certain threshold (default is 8).


14. Static Keyword (Static class and static variable, Static method->Only one thread is allowed to access the method)
The static keyword in Java is used for memory management and allows us to create class-level variables and methods.
When a variable or method is declared as static, it belongs to the class rather than to instances of the class.
This means that static members can be accessed without creating an object of the class.

1️⃣ Static Variables (Class Variables)
Static variables are initialized only once, at the start of the execution.
They are common to all instances of the class, meaning that if one instance modifies the static variable, it will reflect in all other instances.
class MyClass {
    static int count = 0;
    }

2️⃣ Static Methods
A static method can only access static variables and call other static methods. It cannot access instance variables or instance methods.
Static methods are often used for utility or helper functions that don’t depend on instance state.

3️⃣ Static Blocks
Static blocks are executed before the main method when the class is loaded for the first time.
They are useful for initializing static variables that require complex logic.

    static {
        value = 10;  // Static initialization block
        System.out.println("Static block executed!");
    }

4️⃣ Static Classes
A static nested class can access only the static members (variables and methods) of the outer class.
It does not require an instance of the outer class to be created.


15. How to create Immutable class
16. JDK vs JRE/WAR vs JAR
1️⃣ What is a JAR File?
A JAR file is a package file format that bundles multiple files into a single archive file.
These files could include Java class files, metadata, and resource files like images or property files.
JAR files are typically used to package Java libraries, components, or standalone applications.

2️⃣ What is a WAR File?
A WAR file is specifically designed for packaging web applications in Java.
It is used to bundle the entire web application, including the Java servlets, JSPs (JavaServer Pages), HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and other resources.


17. Split vs Substring
1️⃣ Use split() when you need to divide a string into multiple parts based on a delimiter or pattern.
It is suitable for situations like parsing CSV data or breaking a sentence into words.

2️⃣ Use substring() when you need to extract a specific portion of a string by specifying start and end indices.
It’s useful when working with known fixed-length parts or structured data in a string.

18. What is Serialization?
Serialization in Java is the process of converting an object into a byte stream so that it can be saved to a file, transmitted over a network, or stored in a database.
The reverse process, called deserialization, reconstructs the object from the byte stream.

It is mainly used when we need to:
Save an object’s state to a file or database.
Send objects over a network (e.g., in distributed systems).
Store objects in cache for later retrieval.

class Person implements Serializable {
    private static final long serialVersionUID = 1L; // Recommended for versioning

The serialVersionUID is a unique identifier for a class. It ensures backward compatibility during deserialization.
If a class structure changes but the same UID is maintained, old serialized objects can still be deserialized.

If serialVersionUID is not defined, Java generates one dynamically, but if the class changes (even slightly), deserialization will fail with InvalidClassException.

Should You Still Use Java Serialization?
🔴 NO → For new projects, avoid Java serialization. Use JSON, Protobuf, or Kryo instead.
🔴 YES → If working with legacy systems that require Java serialization, ensure proper security and

19. Comparator vs Comparable
Key Differences:
Feature	                   Comparable	                                   Comparator
Package	                   java.lang	                                   java.util
Implementation	           Implemented inside the class (compareTo)	       Implemented as a separate class (compare)
Sorting Criteria	       Only one (natural ordering)	                   Multiple sorting criteria
Modifies Class?	           ✅ Yes (class must implement Comparable)	       ❌ No (keeps sorting logic separate)
Used in	                   Collections.sort(list)	                       Collections.sort(list, comparator)
Java 8 Alternative	       Collections.sort(list)	                       list.sort(Comparator.comparing(...))
Method                     compareTo() should be overrided in class        compare() Two different pojo class can be compared
                           for Collections.sort(Employee obj) to work      Implemented as a separate class (compare) -> class NameComparator implements Comparator<Person>

20. SOAP vs REST
Feature	          SOAP	                                                   REST
Full Form	      Simple Object Access Protocol	                           Representational State Transfer
Type	          Protocol	                                               Architectural style
Message Format	  XML only	                                               JSON, XML, HTML, Text
Speed	          Slower (due to XML and more processing)	               Faster (lightweight, mostly JSON)
Security	      Built-in WS-Security, supports ACID transactions         Uses HTTPS and OAuth for security
Statefulness	  Stateful (remembers previous requests)	               Stateless (each request is independent)
Flexibility	      Rigid (follows strict structure)	                       Flexible (uses different data formats)
Use Case	      Banking, Payment Gateways, Enterprise Applications	   Web services, Mobile apps, Public APIs



21. Diff between wait() and sleep() in java?
1️⃣ Key Differences
Feature	                  wait()	                                            sleep()
Belongs To	              Object class	                                        Thread class
Purpose	                  Makes the thread wait and releases the monitor lock	Pauses the thread for a given time but does not release the lock
Lock Handling	          Releases the lock	                                    Keeps the lock till sleep(100) time goes off
Where It Is Used	      Used inside a synchronized block/method	            Can be used anywhere
How to Resume?	          notify() or notifyAll()	                            Automatically resumes after the specified time
Checked Exception?	      ❌ No checked exception	                            ✅ Throws InterruptedException
Common Use Case	          Inter-thread communication	                        Temporarily pausing execution

22. Methods inside the Object class
Method	                  Description
clone()	                  Creates a shallow copy of the object.
equals(Object obj)	      Compares two objects for equality.
finalize()	              Called by the Garbage Collector before an object is destroyed.
getClass()	              Returns the runtime class of the object.
hashCode()	              Returns the hash code (unique ID) of the object.
toString()	              Returns a string representation of the object.
notify()	              Wakes up one waiting thread.
notifyAll()            	  Wakes up all waiting threads.
wait()	                  Makes a thread wait until notify() or notifyAll() is called.
wait(long timeout)	      Makes a thread wait for the specified time (milliseconds).
wait(long timeout,int nanos)	Makes a thread wait for the specified time (milliseconds + nanoseconds).

23. super keyword in Java
Use Case	          Purpose
super.variable	      Access parent class variables if they are hidden by child class variables.
super.method()	      Call parent class methods when overridden in a child class.
super()	              Call the parent class constructor from the child class constructor.


24. When finally block wont run?
The finally block is always executed after the try block, regardless of whether an exception occurs or not.
However, there are some rare cases where the finally block will not execute.

🔹 1. When System.exit(0) is Called
If System.exit(0) is invoked inside the try or catch block, it terminates the JVM immediately, preventing finally from executing.
public class Test {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        try {
            System.out.println("Inside try");
            System.exit(0);  // JVM terminates here
        } finally {
            System.out.println("Inside finally");
        }
    }
}

🔹 2. When JVM Crashes (Due to Errors Like OutOfMemoryError)
If the program runs out of memory or encounters a serious JVM error (StackOverflowError, OutOfMemoryError), the finally block may not run.
public class Test {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        try {
            int[] arr = new int[Integer.MAX_VALUE]; // Causes OutOfMemoryError
        } finally {
            System.out.println("Inside finally");
        }
    }
}

Summary
JVM crashes (OutOfMemoryError, StackOverflowError)
System.exit(0)
Process is killed externally (Ctrl+C, Task Manager, kill -9)
Thread is forcefully stopped


25. What is autoboxing?
1️⃣ What is Autoboxing?
🔹 Autoboxing is the automatic conversion of primitive data types into their corresponding wrapper class objects by the Java compiler.
👉 Example: int → Integer, double → Double, char → Character, etc.

2️⃣ Behind the Scenes (How Autoboxing Works Internally)
Integer num = 5;
// Internally, Java does:
Integer num = Integer.valueOf(5);
✅ The compiler automatically adds Integer.valueOf(5), converting 5 (int) into an Integer object


26. Synchronized block vs Synchronized method?
Both synchronized blocks and synchronized methods are used to control access to shared resources by multiple threads,
but they differ in how and where the synchronization is applied.

1️⃣ Synchronized Method
A synchronized method ensures that only one thread at a time can execute the method on an
instance of the class (for instance methods) or on the class itself (for static methods).

2️⃣ Synchronized Block
A synchronized block allows you to synchronize only a portion of code, rather than the whole method.
You can specify the object on which the synchronization should be applied.
synchronized (object) {
        // Code to be synchronized
    }

27. Generics. What is the use of '?' in generics?
Generics enable type-safe operations by allowing you to specify a class or method to work with objects of any type while providing compile-time checks.
Instead of specifying a specific type (like String, Integer, etc.), you can use type parameters (like T, E, K, V) which can represent any object type.


28. Why static fields cannot be serialized?
1️⃣ Static Fields Belong to the Class, Not the Instance
Static fields are class-level variables, meaning they belong to the class itself rather than to any individual object (instance) of the class.
Serialization, on the other hand, works by serializing the state of an object — the instance variables that belong to that particular object.


29. The "this" Keyword in Java?
The this keyword in Java is a reference variable that refers to the current instance of a class.
It is commonly used in object-oriented programming to differentiate between instance variables and parameters,
call other constructors, and access the current object.

1️⃣When the parameter names are the same as the instance variable names, this is used to distinguish between them.

1.2 Calling Another Constructor (Constructor Chaining)
this() can be used to call another constructor of the same class. This helps in constructor chaining.
    // Constructor 1
    public Person(String name) {
        this(name, 0);  // Calling Constructor 2 with default age 0
    }

    // Constructor 2
    public Person(String name, int age) {
        this.name = name;
        this.age = age;
    }

In this case, the first constructor (Person(String name)) calls the second constructor (Person(String name, int age)) using this(name, 0).
Cannot be used in static methods: Since this refers to an instance of a class, it cannot be used in static methods (because static methods are not bound to any instance).


30.what is Marker interface? why?
A Marker Interface in Java is an interface that has no methods or fields—it
serves as a tag or marker to indicate some special behavior to the Java runtime or compiler.

Why Use a Marker Interface?
Marker interfaces are used to indicate that a class has a special property so that certain Java mechanisms
or frameworks can recognize and process these classes differently.
They are mainly used for runtime type identification.

Examples of Marker Interfaces in Java
1.Serializable (java.io.Serializable)
      Marks a class as serializable so that its objects can be converted into a byte stream.
2.Cloneable (java.lang.Cloneable)
      Marks a class as cloneable so that the Object.clone() method can be used.
3.Remote (java.rmi.Remote)
      Marks a class as a remote object for RMI (Remote Method Invocation).




